# Localisation / translation

For a background see http://www.vogella.com/tutorials/EclipseInternationalization and consider that most Elexis plugins are still Eclips 3 based.

We use "Trema":http://netceteragroup.github.io/trema-eclipse/. It is comprised of an Eclipse-Plugin, which has a nice editor for the texts.trm file placed at the root of
each project which has messages to be translated into different languages. The "Trema maven plugin":http://netceteragroup.github.io/trema-maven/ creates messages_<lang>.properties
files in an early build phase.

With the Tream plugin each save action updates the messages*.properties files specified in the pom.xml. But no new constants are added to the Messages.java file. This must be done manually.

For finding the name of the localized string (e.g. in a dialog), it is helpful to activate the line @<filter>addkeytovalue</filter>@ (see "pom.xml":ch.elexis.core.ui/pom.xml).
After rebuilding each localized string gets the name of the key appended.

## New tool Trema

The branch https://github.com/ngiger/elexis-3-core/tree/i18n was used in the first quarter of 2017 to explore the possibilities to create an italian translation.

We use "Trema":http://netceteragroup.github.io/trema-eclipse/. It is comprised of an Eclipse-Plugin, which has a nice editor for the texts.trm file placed at the root of each project which has messages to be translated into different languages. The "Trema maven plugin":http://netceteragroup.github.io/trema-maven/ creates messages_<lang>.properties files in an early build phase.

With the Tream plugin each save action updates the messages*.properties files specified in the pom.xml. But no new constants are added to the Messages.java file. This must be done manually.

For finding the name of the localized string (e.g. in a dialog), it is helpful to activate the line @<filter>addkeytovalue</filter>@ (see "pom.xml":bundles/ch.elexis.core.l10n/pom.xml).
After rebuilding each localized string gets the name of the key appended.

As of december 2017 I am unsure whether, we really should use Trema or not. As I decided to move all message to a new plugin ch.elexis.core.l10n and  maybe it will be easier for other developers to use the *properties files.

## Why we place everything into one file

* When starting up we see clearly which messages or used or missing.
* Using constants in Messages.java make searching for occurrences much easier
* It is easier to detect/correct spelling differences/replacing one word by another

## Task list for Elexis 3.4 -> 3.5 french translation

### Howto migrate a single Messages.java which extends NLS

* Add a dependency (if needed) to ch.elexis.core.l10n in the MANIFEST.MF
* Check the feature.xml to ensure that ch.elexis.core.l10n gets included, too
* Edit the Messages.java file
	* change the to to look like
	   package ch.elexis.core.ui;
	    public class Messages  {
	    };	
	* copy all String xy = ; to ch.elexis.core.l10n.Messages.java
	* Remove line containing "BUNDLE_NAME"
	* replace all strings "String (.*);" using a regular expression with "String \1 = ch.elexis.core.l10n.Messages.\1;"
* Remove the message*.properties files

### Before committing the changes

* Sort the string constants in ch.elexis.core.l10n.Messages.java

### Howto migrate a single Messages.java using  java.util.ResourceBundle

* Add a dependency (if needed) to ch.elexis.core.l10n in the MANIFEST.MF
* Check the feature.xml to ensure that ch.elexis.core.l10n gets included, too
* Replace the Messages.java with an empty declaration like

	   package ch.rgw.utility;
	    public class Messages  {
	    };	
 
* Build the project 
* For each failing replace (using regular expression `Messages.getString\("(.*)\.(.*)"\)`  by `Messages.\1_\2`
* Using Eclipse IDE add  each non declared constant to Messages.java
* Remove `= null` and `final` in the Message.java
* continue as with described in point "Howto migrate a single Messages.java which extends NLS"

### The individual tasks

* *Done:* Use the ruby `script ch.elexis.core.releng/i18n_gen_info.rb` to populate missing french/italian translations via google translations
* *Done:* Convert the 37 (of 162 Messages.java file elexis (core, base,gpl)) which have still the old format to the new format, eg.
  ch.elexis.core.data.util/Messages.java which extend org.eclipse.osgi.util.NLS or import java.util.ResourceBundle
* *Done:* Wait till elexis-3-core/base are converted to the pomless tycho build (as this will move all java files into another subdirectory)
* *Done:* for each Messages.java we redirect all constants to ch.elexis.core.l10n
* The archie plugin has to be treated manually, as the translation is handled somehow differently
* the repository elexis-gpl will only be touched AFTER we merge Joerg sigles changes into 3.5
* Translations which are done via plugin*.properties and similar files, are done manually
* Verify manually the translation
	* If possible use the Jubula GUI tests and examine all generated screenshots
	* Create a dictionary with important translations for common concepts and place it into the elexis-3-core
* *To be decided*: Should we move each language as a separate bundle
* *To be decided*: Should these separate bundes read a CSV (or similar) file to enable clients to update their translation by themselves
	* In favor: Turnaround is fast
	* Against: Changes will not be reported back
	* Against: More work
	
* *Done:* Modified EigenartikelTyp, ICondition, etc which call directly ResourceBundle.getBundle("ch.elexis.core.findings.messages") like this
	* ResourceBundle.getBundle(ch.elexis.core.l10n.Messages.BUNDLE_NAME)
	* Join `getSimpleName()` and `this.name()` with `'_'` and not `'.'`

## Watch for missing/superfluos definitions

* Missing/superfluos translations are flagged when starting the application/loading a plugin, watch them
* Moving/Changing the Messages.java creates problems when merging changes from one branch to another

# Working with trema database

The concerned files are:
    * Messages.java and messages*.properties which are the old source
    * A database elexis-translation my home directory, which is saved as a yaml file (for readability) and as a SQLlite3 databese (for SQL-queries)
    * Outputs as google_translation_cache.yaml/CSV  to be given to translaters (if a csv file exists, the yaml file will be ignored)
    * Texts.trm as the trema fil

To be able to use the google translation, the environment variable TRANSLATE_API_KEY must be defined

The workflow was the following

* Parse all the Messages.java and import them into the database ($HOME/elexis-translation.db) using

    ../elexis-3-core/ch.elexis.core.releng/i18n_gen_info.rb --parse-messsage bundles/

* Add missing translations, must be called for each language, eg, fr or it. Creates or updates $HOME/google_translation_cache.[csv|yaml]

    ../elexis-3-core/ch.elexis.core.releng/i18n_gen_info.rb --add-missing fr
      Initialized for 0 directories
      We want to translate 6758 items for de
      Translating Angegebener Kontakt nicht vorhanden found 1 was Angegebener Kontakt nicht vorhanden
      <...>
      Saving 7442 entries to /home/niklaus/google_translation_cache.yaml

* Generate a new trema file

      ../elexis-3-core/ch.elexis.core.releng/i18n_gen_info.rb --gen-trema
      Please report a bug if this causes problems.
      Initialized for 0 directories
      Generated /home/niklaus/trema.trm with 20381 nr_msgs

* Copy the updated trema.trm into the l10n directory, generate the properties, eg.

      cp /home/niklaus/trema.trm ./bundles/ch.elexis.base.l10n/rsc/texts.trm
      mvn clean process-sources
      git add ./bundles/ch.elexis.base.l10n

### Work to todo with i18n_gen_info.rb

* *Done:* We should no longer generate a texts.trm for each plugin, only for the l10n project
* For this project we should emit only
* Instead of generating a plugin.trm we should directly generate the plugin_[lang].properties file
